DOC-306 New Wordpress Composer Guide (#7339)
pantheon-systems/documentation: source/content/guides/wordpress-composer/04-bedrock-composer.md

---

> title: Using Bedrock to Create Your WordPress Pantheon Site

Reviewer: In general, I don't think we should be proposing people to use Bedrock upstream yet as it's not production-ready and development is still pending/in-progress.

Reviewer 2: Agree, please remove this section until we have a supported Bedrock upstream.

> title: Using Bedrock to Create Your WordPress Pantheon Site

Reviewer: In general, I don't think we should be proposing people to use Bedrock upstream yet as it's not production-ready and development is still pending/in-progress.

subtitle: Create a Composer-managed WordPress Site with Bedrock
description: Learn more about Bedrock for Composer-managed WordPress sites.
categories: [develop]
tags: [wordpress]
contributors: [whitneymeredith]
layout: guide
showtoc: true
permalink: docs/guides/wordpress-composer/bedrock-composer
anchorid: bedrock-composer
---

> [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) does not fully support WordPress, however, Bedrock is a central feature of Composer. [Bedrock](https://roots.io/bedrock/) is a custom WordPress project structure that helps simplify working on large projects with multiple plugins and custom code. 

Reviewer: "Bedrock is a central feature of Composer" not sure what does this mean. Maybe of "Composer in the Wordpress ecosystem"?

Reviewer 3: Agree with @kporras07. _Bedrock_ isn't a central feature of Composer as Composer exists far and wide outside of the WordPress-specific implementation in Bedrock. I would also argue that "Composer does not fully support WordPress" is not entirely accurate. I would rephrase this to:

```suggestion
WordPress does not natively support [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/), however, Bedrock is a WordPress-specific framework for using Composer on WordPress sites. [Bedrock](https://roots.io/bedrock/) is a custom WordPress project structure that helps simplify working on large projects with multiple plugins and custom code. 
```

> [Composer](https://getcomposer.org/) does not fully support WordPress, however, Bedrock is a central feature of Composer. [Bedrock](https://roots.io/bedrock/) is a custom WordPress project structure that helps simplify working on large projects with multiple plugins and custom code. 

Reviewer: "Bedrock is a central feature of Composer" not sure what does this mean. Maybe of "Composer in the Wordpress ecosystem"?

> ## Create a New Pantheon WordPress Site with Bedrock

Reviewer 3: It feels like a step is missing here. How do users get the site to start out? When using `composer create-project` it is expected that this is the first step in setting up a site in an empty repository. This isn't possible if we've created a site first as described in the "Create a Basic Composer-managed WordPress Site" doc. Even if we deleted everything from that site after creating and cloning, we'd still have the `.git` directory left (or we'd break the ability to commit and push).

There is an "Empty WordPress" upstream that was created for this purpose, is the intention that they start out with that? (I suspect that would still run into issues if cloned because the directory would still not be empty when running `composer create-project`.)

1. Run the following command in Terminus:

    ```bash

>     composer create-project your_site

Reviewer: This command is probably incomplete

Reviewer 3: The Bedrock docs list `composer create-project roots/bedrock` as the start step for installing Bedrock. This command pulls in `roots/bedrock` to be the framework for the Composer-ized project, so replacing `roots/bedrock` with `your_site` would break/not pull in Bedrock.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    composer create-project roots/bedrock
```

>     composer create-project your_site

Reviewer: This command is probably incomplete

    ```

1. Update the [environment variables](https://docs.roots.io/bedrock/master/environment-variables/#wp-env) in your project's `.env` file.

> 1. Store your `.env` outside of the project root on the Pantheon server. 

Reviewer 3: this step seems out of order. All the other steps relating to `.env` are below the step to commit `vendor` and `web`. Also, for the record, I didn't need to _create_ a `.env` file, I just had one, presumably as part of the Bedrock initialization step.

    - Bedrock is configured to look for the `.env` file in the `files/private` directory by default. This is also the location where Pantheon stores all files that shouldn't be accessible to the public.

1. Commit the `vendor` and `web` directories.

    - Pantheon does not support using Composer to install dependencies that are deployed to Pantheon servers. You must commit the entire `vendor` and `web` directories into your Git repo to ensure that your dependencies are installed for the new project.

> 1. Convert the `web/app/uploads` directory to a [symlink](https://github.com/git-for-windows/git/wiki/Symbolic-Links) that points to the `files` directory. 

Reviewer 3: The link is a specific Windows-only method of creating symbolic links that will not work on Mac/*nix machines. Perhaps link to documentation for both?

    - This is necessary because Pantheon stores media files in the `files` directory instead of the `uploads` directory.

> 1. Create the initial `.env` file.

Reviewer 3: As mentioned above, this wasn't necessary for me in testing, I just needed to move it to `files/private`

    - This is necessary because Bedrock uses environment variables to manage sensitive credentials. These environment variables usually come from multiple sources. The most important variable is the `.env` file which Bedrock uses instead of the standard WordPress `wp-config.php` file. Pantheon was not designed to create the initial `.env` file that your Bedrock site requires. You must create it yourself and upload it to the Pantheon server. The easiest way to do that is by connecting to your Pantheon server using FTP and creating the `.env` file. 

1. Upload the newly created `.env` file by connecting to the Pantheon server using an FTP.

    - To find your connection information: Navigate to the site's **Dev** environment in Pantheon > click **Connection Info** > scroll to the bottom of the menu to view your SFTP connection information.

1. Connect to your Pantheon site using the SFTP credentials located in the previous step > navigate to the `files` directory > create a `private` directory > create the `.env` file in the `private` directory by running the following command:

>     ```bash

Reviewer 3: It might be more helpful to provide an example of what the `.env` file looks like since this looks like Bedrock default. None of the credentials are exposed because we use global server variables.

```bash
DB_NAME=$_ENV['DB_NAME']
DB_USER=$_ENV['DB_USER']
DB_PASSWORD=$_ENV['DB_PASSWORD']

# Optionally, you can use a data source name (DSN)
# When using a DSN, you can remove the DB_NAME, DB_USER, DB_PASSWORD, and DB_HOST variables
# DATABASE_URL='mysql://database_user:database_password@database_host:database_port/database_name'

# Optional database variables
DB_HOST=$_ENV['DB_HOST'].':'.$_ENV['DB_PORT']
# DB_PREFIX='wp_'

WP_ENV='development'
WP_HOME='http://example.com'
WP_SITEURL="${WP_HOME}/wp"

# Specify optional debug.log path
# WP_DEBUG_LOG='/path/to/debug.log'

# Generate your keys here: https://roots.io/salts.html
AUTH_KEY=$_ENV['AUTH_KEY']
SECURE_AUTH_KEY=$_ENV['SECURE_AUTH_KEY']
LOGGED_IN_KEY=$_ENV['LOGGED_IN_KEY']
NONCE_KEY=$_ENV['NONCE_KEY']
AUTH_SALT=$_ENV['AUTH_SALT']
SECURE_AUTH_SALT=$_ENV['SECURE_AUTH_SALT']
LOGGED_IN_SALT=$_ENV['LOGGED_IN_SALT']
NONCE_SALT='generateme'
```

    WP_ENV=development
    WP_SITEURL=${WP_HOME}/wp

    Generate your keys here: https://roots.io/salts.html
    AUTH_KEY='generateme'
    SECURE_AUTH_KEY='generateme'
    LOGGED_IN_KEY='generateme'
    NONCE_KEY='generateme'
    AUTH_SALT='generateme'
    SECURE_AUTH_SALT='generateme'
    LOGGED_IN_SALT='generateme'
    NONCE_SALT='generateme'
    ```

    - Your `.env` will be created. Your new `.env` file is smaller than the original Bedrock `.env` file because Pantheon automatically supplies many of the environment variables that are usually stored in the `.env` file.

1. Replace all placeholder keys with the [new keys](https://roots.io/salts.html).

1. Use [SFTP or git](/guides/wordpress-git/) to push changes directly to your Pantheon site.

> 

Reviewer 3: There are more steps missing here as well. After following the steps, I had a site created but I was not able to access the admin, see https://dev-cr-bedrock-docs-test.pantheonsite.io/

I am not sure exactly what's missing without further testing, but this workflow, even with the adjustments I made to try to get it working, does not end with a working WordPress site. 😞

## See Also

> - [Pantheon WordPress with Bedrock Recommended GitHub Repository](https://github.com/pantheon-systems/wordpress-bedrock-recommended)

Reviewer 3: This is an unsupported prototype repository that probably we shouldn't link out to until it's in a more finalized state.
